Blog: PostHog vs Optimizely (#7072)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/posthog-vs-optimizely.md

---
title: "In-depth: PostHog vs Optimizely"
date: 2023-10-31
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Comparisons
---

PostHog and Optimizely are both multi-product tools to help you improve your apps and websites. Two important products for each of them are experimentation and feature flags. Beyond these two, they diverge significantly:

- PostHog focuses on helping you build a better product. This means having product and data tools like [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), and [surveys](/surveys).
- Optimizely focuses on being an all-in-one system for marketing. This means having marketing and ecommerce tools like content management, campaign planning, asset management, and checkout customizations.

> This post compares their platforms, experimentation features, reporting, pricing, and more.

Reviewer: Worth doing a second pass to tighten this up a tiny bit. Just boil down the differences to the simplest, most basic concepts – i.e. PostHog is comprehensive product platform, Optimizely is marketing CTR tool, or something along along those lines.

## How is PostHog different than Optimizely?

> ### Product and startup-focused

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Product and startup-focused
```

> PostHog is built for high-growth startups working to build the best possible products. This means being easy to get started and providing all the tools you need at an early stage. As a bonus, PostHog has a generous free plan (and [startups](/startups) get free credits).
> 
> Optimizely focuses on providing marketing, ecommerce, and content tools to massive enterprises. They have fewer product focused tools. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostHog is built for high-growth startups working to build the best possible products. It's easy to get started and provides all the tools you need at an early stage. There's a generous free plan and [startups](/startups) get free credits. 

Optimizely focuses on providing marketing, ecommerce, and content tools to massive enterprises. It has fewer product focused tools. 
```

> ### Transparent, free, and self-service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Transparent, free, and self-service
```

> At PostHog, we are open-source. Everything from our [code](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog) to [roadmap](/roadmap) to [strategy](/handbook) is open for everyone to see. 
> 
> Along with this, you can [sign up for PostHog for free](https://app.posthog.com/). You don’t need to fill out a contact form, add a credit card, or have a sales call. You can use PostHog for free forever if you want.
> 
> Optimizely is open about some areas like roadmap and their SDKs, but they aren’t self-serve or free (although they do offer a limited free trial of some features).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostHog is open source. Everything from our [code](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog) to [roadmap](/roadmap) to [strategy](/handbook) is open for everyone to see. 

Along with this, you can [sign up for PostHog for free](https://app.posthog.com/). You don’t need to fill out a contact form, add a credit card, or have a sales call. You can use PostHog for free forever if you want.

Optimizely is open about some areas, like roadmap and its SDKs, but you have to talk to sales before signing up.
```

> ### Analytics and reporting built-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Analytics and reporting built-in
```

PostHog links all its tools together. This means you get all the features and visualizations of product analytics for your feature flags and A/B tests. You can use them in [trends](/docs/product-analytics/trends), [funnels](/docs/product-analytics/funnels), and even directly query related metrics with [SQL](/docs/product-analytics/sql).

Optimizely has some analytics, such as web marketing, but largely relies on Google Analytics for tracking and reporting. This limits the analysis you can do related to your feature flags and experiments. 

> <ArrayCTA /> 

Reviewer: Add this after the first table, I think.

 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><p class="!mb-0 pb-0.5 !leading-tight"><strong>Project management</strong></p><p class="!mb-0 !text-sm text-opacity-75 leading-none">Manage projects related to experiments</p></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>
</div>

- The big platform difference between the two beyond marketing vs product features is **analytics**. Optimizely relies on external analytics providers like Google and Adobe Analytics to track feature flags and A/B tests. PostHog has a full analytics suite built-in, including [autocapture](/docs/product-analytics/autocapture), [custom events](/docs/getting-started/send-events#2-capture-custom-events), direct SQL access, and more.

- Being a marketing-focused platform, Optimizely includes project and content management tools like request forms, asset libraries, and hypothesis briefs. PostHog leaves the planning to the other tools you are using but does include notebooks for analysis.

## Web experimentation

> Optimizely splits their experimentation features into two separate categories, web and feature. We will compare both separately against PostHog. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimizely splits its experimentation features into two separate categories, web and feature. We will compare both separately against PostHog. 
```

        <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><p class="!mb-0 pb-0.5 !leading-tight"><strong>Scheduling</strong></p><p class="!mb-0 !text-sm text-opacity-75 leading-none">Schedule experiments to run at specific times</p></td>
        <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
        <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><p class="!mb-0 pb-0.5 !leading-tight"><strong>Use external data</strong></p><p class="!mb-0 !text-sm text-opacity-75 leading-none">Use data from other platforms in experiments</p></td>
        <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
        <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

- In Optimizely, many features of web experiments, like scheduling, multi-armed bandits, [multi-variate testing](/tutorials/abn-testing), and advanced personalization are only available on the higher-tier "Accelerate" plan or as add-ons.

> - Although there isn’t a no-code experiment creator for PostHog, it does have a UI to create and manage experiments as well as snippets to make it easy to implement them. For example, you can add a basic experiment anywhere you can insert custom JavaScript like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PostHog doesn't offer a no-code experiment creator yet, but it does have a UI to create and manage experiments as well as snippets to make it easy to implement them. For example, you can add a basic experiment anywhere you can insert custom JavaScript like this:
```

 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><p class="!mb-0 pb-0.5 !leading-tight"><strong>Remote configuration</strong></p><p class="!mb-0 !text-sm text-opacity-75 leading-none">Config your experiments remotely</p></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><p class="!mb-0 pb-0.5 !leading-tight"><strong>Environments</strong></p><p class="!mb-0 !text-sm text-opacity-75 leading-none">Use contexts to manage flag values</p></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>
</div>

In Optimizely, many of the feature experimentation features, like multi-armed bandits and custom segmentation, are only available are the higher tier plans. These are all available for free in PostHog.

## Pricing

> PostHog and Optimizely differ significantly in their approach to pricing. Optimizely is sales-driven and completely opaque. PostHog is self-serve and transparent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostHog and Optimizely are very different here. Optimizely is sales-driven and completely opaque. PostHog is self-serve and transparent.
```

 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><p class="!mb-0 pb-0.5 !leading-tight"><strong>Per-product pricing</strong></p><p class="!mb-0 !text-sm text-opacity-75 leading-none">Different pricing</p></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>
</div>

Both PostHog and Optimizely do per-product pricing. This means each product has its own pricing. Each PostHog product has free forever pricing as well as a generous free tier on paid plans.

Products with pricing for each include:

- Optimizely: content marketing platform, content management system, web experimentation, feature experimentation, configured commerce, customized commerce.

- PostHog: product analytics, session replay, feature flags, A/B testing, surveys.

For many Optimizely products, there are also paid add-ons like advanced personalization, the data platform, and their Salesforce integration. PostHog only has free and paid tiers for each product with a single addition enterprise add-on for SSO, dedicated support, and advanced permissions.

> ![Flag pricing](../images/blog/posthog-vs-optimizely/pricing.png)

Reviewer: Couple of comments:

1. This gets into the weeds a bit too much. I don't feel like I need to know this much
2. The pricing page screenshot is a bit weird because it looks like one of our comparison tables. Best to remove, I think.

<ArrayCTA />

## Reporting

Although Optimizely has web analytics through its content marketing platform, it relies on Google Analytics or other third-party analytics providers for advanced tracking and reporting. 

> PostHog’s product analytics suite shines here. It treats feature flags and experiments as usage so you can analyze them like any other user behavior. On top of standard experiment results, you can use visualizations like trends, funnels, user paths, and even direct SQL access. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostHog’s product analytics suite shines here. It treats feature flags and experiments as usage, so you can analyze them like any other user behavior. On top of standard experiment results, you can use visualizations like trends, funnels, user paths, and even direct SQL access. 
```
